This is a review of the resubmitted ms "Testing Newton's Second Law" by Arenas, Butash, Chin, Malhotra, Nealon, and Rofman. This study examined the relationships between force, acceleration, and mass in a two-dimensional (?) cart and pulley system and found results consistent with Newton's second law. I recommend accept with minor revisions.

Abstract: The abstract could shorten some of the word choices by making explicit reference to Newton's second law. It sounds odd to call the cart "two-dimensional" - it is a 3d physical object and the main motion is a 1D motion; 2D sounds kind of flat.

Introduction: The only confusing part of the introduction is the final paragraph, where all of a sudden it mentions a collision cart and a pulley. The cart is marketed also for momentum studies, but here it is not participating in collisions, so perhaps it might be best just to call it a cart consistent with how it is mentioned before in the text. The pulley here decouples the system so that some of the mass is subject to gravitatonal force while some is not, allowing the researchers to cleverly vary force and mass somewhat independently. Perhaps this could be explained slightly earlier in the introduction.

Methods: The methods and methods figure make reference to pulleys of negligible mass and frictionless planes. If the researchers actually got massless pulleys and frictionless planes they should give the vendor and model number; alternatively they could provide some small justification for why real pulleys and real planes can be modeled as massless and frictionless, respectively. There is a confusing bit where they explain the process of the actual trial, releasing the cart from rest and timing how long it takes to move 0.7 m.

Calculations are shown, but they focus only on the predicted acceleration based on m1 and m2. The paper should also explain how the time data to move 0.7 m was used to calculate the observed/measured acceleration of the system. Those data are given in tables 1 and 2.

Results: The data tables could be more compact by simply summarizing the time and acceleration as mean +/- 1 s.d. at the bottom or in the caption of the table.

Figure 3 needs to have labels and units; the data are squished into the left 1/3 of the plot area. It looks like there are only 2 points and thus they make a perfect line; perhaps a bigger sample size n is needed? Did the paper only do 2 values of m2?

Discussion: It would be nice if the paper would cite work on the error typical for timing physics lab experiments by hand with a stopwatch; perhaps such things could be found online.

The MS mentions hitting the ground; if that is in the data it is a major flaw. If it is not in the data, then discussing it here is an unneeded red flag. 


