This is a review of the manuscript Nealon et al, Testing Newton's Second Law.
The manuscript advertises to test Newton's second law (F=ma) by using a
two-dimensional cart (a one dimensional movement is used) and pulley system
to examine the relationships between F, m, and a. The manuscript claims to
show F and a are directly proportional, and a and m inversely proportional,
but the data are not presented in a way to see this easily. I recommend
major revisions.

Introduction: The introduction is relatively clean. It sets up the equation
form of Newton's second law (F=ma) in the case where mass is not changing.
It then goes on to write the equations of motion for constant acceleration,
as the measure of acceleration used by the researchers is time to move some
distance d. Finally, it sets up two testable hypotheses; either F=ma or F is not ma. It might have been preferable to setup three testable hypotheses;
F=0 is the static case addressed by Newton's first law. F=ma is the second law
under test here. F=some other thing would normally mean Newton hosed something
up or that there are un-modeled forces acting that are significant drivers
of the acceleration.

Design of experiment: The design of experiment here is confused. The authors
state they do 24 trials with a haphazard combination of different total mass,
different hanging mass. It might have made the work stronger if they held
most factors constant and changed only one variable; for example, hold total
system mass constant and only change the hanging mass. This would have allowed
a more direct test of F = ma byt changing F with m held constant.

Methods and materials: These are unacceptable and cannot be replicated.
The authors have given a bullet list of materials only. The materials source
is not given for key pieces like the cart, track. Some items like timer or
string or meterstick are trivial; or data should be given on them so we
can evaluate if handling the string and pulley as massless or frictionless
is valid. The methods are also described in a round-about way not getting to
the point: that the authors timed the time for the cart to move distance
when different masses were hung to provide mg force. A more systematic pattern
of replicates would have been nice here too. The figure given to illustrate
the methods and materials is small, has no scale, and gives a top down view
of the track, with extraneous details and the key feature (that the hanging
mass provides the force is hanging) is absent.

A calculational proceudre is given that derives the acceleration of the system
as a function of the masses m1 and m2. If this was the main thing to be
validated the authors could have placed this in the introduction as the main
thing, and presented their results in terms of (nondimensionalized) acceleration
versus m2/(m1+m2). This would have resulted in a clean linear graph, with
departures from it showing places where the theory is wrong. For example, at
the extremes where friction and timing imprecision would make the a measurement
difficult or affect the motion.

Results: Results are given after discussion. This is wrong. Results should
be given before the discussion and presented with accompanying captions
and text explaining factually what is seen. Strangely, the authors
provide bar charts for everything when the data (mass = unspecified what mass)
are continuous variables.

Discussion: This paper mixes what should be results and discussion. Please
keep discussion of meaning of the graphs and results separate from the factual
presentation of what was actually seen. The manuscript really suffers from not
having some standard test of whether F=ma or not, falling back instead
on handwaving explanations of when something appears directly or inversely
proportional without actually testing it.

Figures: Problems with the figures were mentioned above. The setup photo does
not do a good job of illustrating the setup, while the results graphs
do not help us actually test if F=ma or if a = g m2/(m1+m2). 
